FIPXXXX: Introducing sealerID (#993)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-xxx-sealerid.md

---
fip: "xxx"
title: Introducing sealerID
author: irene (@irenegia), luca (@lucaniz), kuba (@Kubuxu)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/890 
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
dependency: FIP0090
created: 2023-04-18
---

> # FIPxxxx: Introducing sealerID

Reviewer: Nit: FIPXXXX (in upper case)

## Simple Summary

> Add the notion of `sealerID` and use it for the sealing process of NI-PoRep. In particular:

Reviewer: Maybe restructure the sentence to "This adds the notion of '**`sealerID`**', which is used in the sealing process".

### Addressed issues:

1. [solved already] With interactive PoRep the SaaS Provider and Client needs coordination and agreement (therefore trust) about the intermediate interaction with the chain (ie, sending commR on chain) and locking down PCD (PreCommitDeposit). This is resolved by using NI-PoRep [FIP0090](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0090.md) that requires no chain interaction and no deposit.
3. [solved by this FIP] Even with NI-PoRep, some coordination between the SaaS Provider and their client (SP) remains. Indeed during the labeling phase the SaaS Provider creates `ReplicaID` and for this needs to use the `minerID` and `sectorNumber`from the SaaS Client who will receive the replica to be stored. If these values are not correctly used then the SNARK proof will not be valid. This means that a SaaS Provider needs to “wait” for the request (and info) from a SaaS client to seal sectors. In other words, this prevents a SaaS Provider from sealing sectors in advance using its HW at max capacity (and therefore reducing sealing cost for everyone).

## Specification

1. We add a new type of actor: the Sealer Actor (to be used for SaaS Providers);

>     1. This can be a “disposable” actor, no need for an owner key. If something bad happens, create a new id. This is okay because no tokens are locked for this actor;

Reviewer: Please review indentation and numbering to reflect hierarchical relationships properly.

2. Add the method to create and register `SealerID`

>     2. The list of SealerIDs is disjoint from the MinerID list

Author: Right, no singleton actor. We should go with the two separate actors. I'll update the spec with the details you suggested here.

    3. Add a new map `SealerID -> [SectorNumber]` to the chain state (that is, we have a list of used sector numbers for each sealer);
        1. ie, the actor needs `SectorNumber` facilities.
3. Modify the method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` to accept the sealerID to create `ReplicaID` .

>     4. Add the `SealerID` field to `SectorNIActivactionInfo`

Reviewer 2: If these are disjoint sets, your recent post would make the proposal simpler to code and verify: struct{sealerID, sectorNumber} would be a unique identifier, replacing struct{minerID, sectorNumber}

        2. if empty, use the the minerID
        3. if the sealer id is passed, use it for `ReplicaID` (in the place of miner id)
        4. the method updates the right map of used sector numbers (note that this is needed only if we want to have onchain info about sectors grouped by miner;
4. [Access control, needed to avoid front-run attacks]
    5. Store in the Sealer Actor another address: this is an address to a proxy contract that can be used to implement ACL

When an SP onboards a sector (ie, call to method `ProveCommitSectorsNIParams` in the Miner Actor), then call to the Sealer Actor. If the ACL is enabled, then call the ACL contract.

> 

Reviewer 3: Moved design question to https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/890#discussioncomment-9221084 so it’s more discoverable and trackable

> 

Author: it seems to me that the conclusion here is to go with the original proposed design (sealer id in actor code and all other feature, as for example the ACL, in FEVM) 
https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/890#discussioncomment-9229930

> 

Reviewer 4: @magik6k @snadrus what's your take on this proposal?

![Sealer ID](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/assets/23217773/4852d5eb-6c81-4fc7-9f7e-dd7a351ed943)

## Rationale 

> The design aimed to minimize changes with respect to the status quo (in particular, we respect the fact that  `ReplicaID` is a unique identifier in the entire Fileocin system) and to provide future programmability. In particular, as regards the access control feature we decide to implement it using a proxy contract (instead of implementing it directly in the actor) in order to have the possibility of the final users (ie, SaaS providers) to personalize it. 

Reviewer: Could you fix the typo to enhance readability? Perhaps "The design aims to minimize changes with respect to the status quo, particularly maintaining 'ReplicaID' as a unique identifier within the entire Filecoin ecosystem".

> The design aimed to minimize changes with respect to the status quo (in particular, we respect the fact that  `ReplicaID` is a unique identifier in the entire Fileocin system) and to provide future programmability. In particular, as regards the access control feature we decide to implement it using a proxy contract (instead of implementing it directly in the actor) in order to have the possibility of the final users (ie, SaaS providers) to personalize it. 

Reviewer: Fix spelling error of "Filecoin" in this paragraph

## Backwards Compatibility

> 

Reviewer 5: Are there any other instances where we need the inputs to the ReplicaID (original sector number and prover id) after commiting a sector?  Are there any reasons we might want these in the future?  If so it is important to identify them so we can make sure we have enough information in the miner actor state.

> 

Author: > I've been looking into the use of prover_id and sector_number by the window post circuit. I think that these values do not need to match the prover_id and sector_number used by sealing as they are used for challenge generation independent of the sealing process

Correct, they do not need to match.

TODO

## Test Cases

TODO

## Security Considerations

> * For the storage providers, this FIP does not add any security risks respect to the status quo;

Reviewer: "For Storage Providers, this FIP does not introduce additional security risks compared to the status quo".

---
fip: "xxx"
title: Introducing SealerID
author: nicola (@nicola), irene (@irenegia), luca (@lucaniz), kuba (@Kubuxu)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/890 
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
dependency: FIP0090
created: 2023-04-18
---

# FIPXXXX: Introducing sealerID

## Simple Summary

This adds the notion of `sealerID`, which is used in the sealing process of NI-PoRep. In particular:
* We add a new actor, the Sealer Actor so that SealerIDs can be registered;
* `sealerID` can be used to create `ReplicaID` by parting running the SDR labeling algorithm;
* `sealerID` is added to the parameters of the method `ProveCommitSectorsNI`.

## Abstract 

> With the current protocol, the party creates the `ReplicaID` needs to use the same `minerID` that will be used for PoRep verifications. This implies that “pre-sealing” sectors is not a viable option: no sector can be sealed (ie, replica created) ahead of time, before knowing the identity of the miner actor who will own it. To enable this scenario, we introduce the concept of `sealerID` to be used in place of the `minerID` only during sealing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With the current protocol, the party that creates the `ReplicaID` needs to use the same `minerID` that will be used for PoRep verifications. This implies that “pre-sealing” sectors is not a viable option: no sector can be sealed (ie, replica created) ahead of time, before knowing the identity of the miner actor who will own it. To enable this scenario, we introduce the concept of `sealerID` to be used in place of the `minerID` only during sealing.
```

## Motivation

We consider the scenario where Storage Providers want to delegate some of their activities to external parties that offer competitive services at lower costs.

In particular, we call **Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS) Provider** an entity that runs all PoRep operations (labeling the graph, column commitments, MT generation, vanilla proofs and SNARKs generation) needed to get a replica and onboard the sector that contains it.

The SaaS then transfers the replica and the proofs to a **SaaS Client.** This is an SP that will onboard the sector with the replica R (ie, call a ProveCommit method) and will be responsible for storing R and proving validity of the corresponding sector (ie, running window- and winning-PoSt), and/or adding data to the committed capacity sector via SnapDeals.

> ### Addressed issues:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Addressed issues
```

1. [solved already] With interactive PoRep the SaaS Provider and Client needs coordination and agreement (therefore trust) about the intermediate interaction with the chain (ie, sending commR on chain) and locking down PCD (PreCommitDeposit). This is resolved by using NI-PoRep [FIP0090](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0090.md) that requires no chain interaction and no deposit.

> 2. [solved by this FIP] Even with NI-PoRep, some coordination between the SaaS Provider and their client (SP) remains. Indeed during the labeling phase the SaaS Provider creates `ReplicaID` and for this needs to use the `minerID` and `sectorNumber`from the SaaS Client who will receive the replica to be stored. If these values are not correctly used then the SNARK proof will not be valid. This means that a SaaS Provider needs to “wait” for the request (and info) from a SaaS client to seal sectors. In other words, this prevents a SaaS Provider from sealing sectors in advance using its HW at max capacity (and therefore reducing sealing cost for everyone).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. [solved by this FIP] Even with NI-PoRep, some coordination between the SaaS Provider and their client (SP) remains. Indeed during the labelling phase the SaaS Provider creates `ReplicaID` and for this it needs to use the `minerID` and `sectorNumber` from the SaaS Client who will receive the replica to be stored. If these values are not correctly used then the SNARK proof will not be valid. This means that a SaaS Provider needs to “wait” for the request (and info) from a SaaS client to seal sectors. In other words, this prevents a SaaS Provider from sealing sectors in advance using its HW at max capacity (and therefore reducing sealing cost for everyone).
```

## Specification

> 1. We add a new type of actor: the Sealer Actor;

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. We add a new type of built-in actor: the Sealer Actor;
```
```suggestion
1. We add a new type of actor: the Sealer Actor;
```

   - This can be a “disposable” actor, no need for an owner key. If something bad happens, create a new id. This is okay because no tokens are locked for this actor;

>    - The Sealer Actor is multiple instance type: Anyone can create a Sealer Actor and `sealerID` will simply be the actor ID. This ensures that the list of sealerIDs is disjoint from the list of minerIDs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - The Sealer Actor is a multiple instance type: Anyone can create a Sealer Actor and `sealerID` will simply be the actor ID. This ensures that the list of sealerIDs is disjoint from the list of minerIDs.
```

can I get some clarification on this language, what does it mean for it to be a "multiple instance type"?

   - The new actor needs `sectorNumber` facilities: There is a map `sealerID -> [sealerSectorNumber]` in the state (that is, we have a list of used sector numbers for each sealer); Concretely this sector number list would be a bitfield as is the case of the miner actor.

2. Modify the method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` to accept the sealerID to create `ReplicaID` .

>     - Add a new field to `SectorNIActivactionInfo` for passing the sealerID info:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Add a new field to `SectorNIActivationInfo` for passing the sealerID info:
```

Reviewer 4: I see that FIP-0090 already has a `SealerID` in it, but it's not nullable / `Option`, is there some reconciliation that needs to happen between the two?

Author: @ZenGround0 could you help here please?

Reviewer 5: Let's not allow these to be nullable.  FIP 0090 needs to assert some constraints (SealerID == ActorID) but once the sealer actor shows up we won't need any constraints, we'll just check whatever actor is at SealerID for unused SealingNumber.  If we don't rely on an external SealingActor the caller can set SealerID to ActorID

>       - if empty, use the the minerID when creating the `ReplicaID`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      - if null, use the the minerID when creating the `ReplicaID`
```

alternatively `0`?

Author: see zen's comment 
https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/854#discussioncomment-9471626

      - if a value is passed, use this for `ReplicaID` (in the place of `minerID`)

>     - Add a new field to `SectorNIActivactionInfo` for passing `sealerSectorNumber`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Add a new field to `SectorNIActivationInfo` for passing `sealerSectorNumber`:
```

> 2. Modify the method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` to accept the sealerID to create `ReplicaID` .
>     - Add a new field to `SectorNIActivationInfo` for passing the `SealerID`:
>       - if empty, use the the minerID when creating the `ReplicaID`
>       - if a value is passed, use this for `ReplicaID` (in the place of `minerID`)
>     - Add a new field to `SectorNIActivationInfo` for passing `SealerSectorNumber`:
>       - again, if we are in the case EMPTY_SEALER_ID, then `sealerSectorNumber` could either be ignored or enforced to be 0, otherwis eit is used for `ReplicaID`;
>       - note that the miner actor identifies sectors internally using a `SectorID` structure with a `{minerID, sectorNumber}` pair. This is replaced by `{minerID, sectorNumber, minerSectorNumber}` where last value can be 0.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Modify the handling of parameters to `ProveCommitSectorsNI` to accept the sealerID to create `ReplicaID`:
    - Allow the `SealerID` field in `SectorNIActivationInfo` to specify an actor separate to the calling actor and use this for `ReplicaID` (i.e. it will either be the actor ID of the storage provider, or the actor ID of the sealer in the case of involvement of a sealing SaaS).
    - Allow the `SealingNumber` field of `SectorNIActivationInfo` to accept a sector number different to the number allocated in the calling actor's state for this sector and use this for `ReplicaID`.
      - note that the miner actor identifies sectors internally using a `SectorID` structure with a `{minerID, sectorNumber}` pair. This is replaced by `{minerID, sectorNumber, sealerSectorNumber}` where 2nd and 3rd values may be the same.
```

So does this get us closer to the diff on top of 0090 @irenegia @ZenGround0 ?

   
       
3. [optional/future] ACL (the sealer has control on who can activate their sealed sectors)
    -  Store in the Sealer Actor another address: this is an address to a proxy contract that can be used to implement ACL. When an SP onboards a sector, then call to the Sealer Actor. If the ACL is enabled, then call the ACL contract. 
    - TODOs:  write the concrete interface to the ACL contract (eg, `check(sectorNumber, minerID) bool`) ![Sealer ID](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/assets/23217773/4852d5eb-6c81-4fc7-9f7e-dd7a351ed943)

> 

Reviewer 6: The sketch of this spec looks fine, but it's missing a lot of detail at the moment.
- The sealer actor's state schema should be specified (fairly simple, but at least leave room for an owner later on)
- The sealer actor will need a method that checks and consumes sector numbers, called from the miner actor.
- If we want the ACL features now, the API for it needs to be specified here. Or just cut it from scope now.

# FIPxxxx: Introducing SealerID

## Public doc

<table>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>fip</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>title</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>author</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>discussion-to</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>status</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>type</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>category</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>created</strong>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>xxxx
   </td>
   <td>Introducing sealerID
   </td>
   <td>kuba (@kubuku), irene (@irenegia), luca (@lucaniz)
   </td>
   <td><a href="https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/890">https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/890</a>
   </td>
   <td>Draft
   </td>
   <td>Technical
   </td>
   <td>Core
   </td>
   <td> 17th April 2024
   </td>
  </tr>

> </table>

Author: edited

> 

Reviewer 3: I think you should call out that this FIP is dependent on NI PoRep by adding `dependency:` to the header

## Simple Summary

Add the notion of `sealerID` and use it for the sealing process for NI-PoRep. In particular:

> * We add a new actor, the Sealer Actor so that for SealerIDs can be registered;

Reviewer 3: Peer: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/890#discussioncomment-9194975

Author: see my answers in the discussion!

> * SealerID can be used in the method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` to seal sectors.

Reviewer 3: I understand this is the simple summary section so we are just trying to capture high level steps, but this is quite confusing to me.

- `ProveCommitSectorsNI` message is sent _after_ the sector is sealed, upon sector activation onchain.
- So should it be that the SealerID will be used to seal the sectors, and get passed in the ProveCommitSectorsNI message param, iiuc?

Author: > and get passed in the ProveCommitSectorsNI message param

yes, correct

## Abstract 

> With the current protocol, when a party creates `ReplicaID` needs to use the same `minerID` that will be used for PoRep verifications. This implies that “pre-sealing” sector is not a viable option: no sector can be sealed (ie, replica created) ahead of time, before knowing the identity of the SPs who will own it. To enable this scenario we introduce the concept of `sealerID` to be used in the place of the `minerID` only during sealing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the current protocol, the party creates the `ReplicaID` needs to use the same `minerID` that will be used for PoRep verifications. This implies that “pre-sealing” sectors is not a viable option: no sector can be sealed (ie, replica created) ahead of time, before knowing the identity of the miner actor who will own it. To enable this scenario, we introduce the concept of `sealerID` to be used in place of the `minerID` only during sealing.
```

## Motivation

> We consider the scenario where Storage Providers want to delegate some of their activities to external parties in order to let a competition of service providers optimize and lower the costs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We consider the scenario where Storage Providers want to delegate some of their activities to external parties that offer competitive services at lower costs.
```

In particular, we call **Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS) Provider** an entity that runs all PoRep operations (labeling the graph, column commitments, MT generation, vanilla proofs and SNARKs generation) needed to get a replica and onboard the sector that contains it.

> The SaaS then transfers the replica and the proofs to a **SaaS Client.** This is an SP that will onboard the sector with the replica R (ie, call a ProveCommit method) and will be responsible for storing R and proving validity of the corresponding sector (ie, running window- and winning-PoSt).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The SaaS then transfers the replica and the proofs to a **SaaS Client.** This is an SP that will onboard the sector with the replica R (ie, call a ProveCommit method) and will be responsible for storing R and proving validity of the corresponding sector (ie, running window- and winning-PoSt), and/or adding data to the sector via SnapDeals.
```

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

### Addressed issues:

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

1. [solved already] With interactive PoRep the SaaS Provider and Client needs coordination and agreement (therefore trust) about the intermediate interaction with the chain (ie, sending commR on chain) and locking down PCD (PreCommitDeposit). This is resolved by using NI-PoRep [FIP0090](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0090.md) that requires no chain interaction and no deposit.

> 2. [solved by this FIP] Even with NI-PoRep, some coordination between the SaaS Provider and Client remains. Indeed during the labeling phase the Provider creates `ReplicaID` and for this needs to use the `minerID` and `sectorNumber`from the SaaS Client who will receive the replica to be stored. If these values are not correctly used then the SNARK proof will not be valid. This means that a Provider needs to “wait” for the request (and info) from a client to seal sectors. In other words, this prevents a SaaS Provider from sealing sectors in advance using its HW at max capacity (and therefore reducing sealing cost for everyone).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. [solved by this FIP] Even with NI-PoRep, some coordination between the SaaS Provider and their client (SP) remains. Indeed during the labeling phase the SaaS Provider creates `ReplicaID` and for this needs to use the `minerID` and `sectorNumber`from the SaaS Client who will receive the replica to be stored. If these values are not correctly used then the SNARK proof will not be valid. This means that a SaaS Provider needs to “wait” for the request (and info) from a SaaS client to seal sectors. In other words, this prevents a SaaS Provider from sealing sectors in advance using its HW at max capacity (and therefore reducing sealing cost for everyone).
```

Reviewer 3: Providers and clients are often considered very specific roles in Filecoin, i.e Provider -> Storage Provider; Client -> deal/data clients. suggested the above changes just to be a bit more specific

## Specification

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

1. We add a new type of actor: the Sealer Actor (to be used for SaaS Providers);
    1. This can be a “disposable” actor, no need for an owner key. If something bad happens, create a new id. This is okay because no tokens are locked for this actor;
2. Add the method to create and register `SealerID`
    2. The list of SealerIDs is disjoint from the MinerID list
    3. Add a new map `SealerID -> [SectorNumber]` to the chain state (that is, we have a list of used sector numbers for each sealer);
        1. ie, the actor needs `SectorNumber` facilities.

> 3. Modify the method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` to accept the sealerID to create `ReplicaID` .

Reviewer 3: If NI PoRep were accepted and shipped in an upgrade first, we will need to add a new method, ProveCommitSectorsNI2, for this change, given this is a breaking change.

Reviewer 2: As this "fully enables" NI-Porep, does this make it worth considering folding this into that FIP?

Reviewer 5: However we organize the FIPS I think it would be ideal to land both at the same time

Author: @ZenGround0 we are planning to ship NI-PoRep in nv23, but I don't think sealearID can make for it, unless we prioritise it  now (fine with me)... what's your opinion on this?

Reviewer 5: Personally I would prefer we ship them together so we can maintain the momentum from NI Porep and immediately unlock sealing as a service.  But I don't know if filoz has the capacity to get both done on time.

    4. Add the `SealerID` field to `SectorNIActivactionInfo`
        2. if empty, use the the minerID
        3. if the sealer id is passed, use it for `ReplicaID` (in the place of miner id)
        4. the method updates the right map of used sector numbers (note that this is needed only if we want to have onchain info about sectors grouped by miner;
4. [Access control, needed to avoid front-run attacks]
    5. Store in the Sealer Actor another address: this is an address to a proxy contract that can be used to implement ACL

> When an SP onboards a sector (ie, call to method `ProveCommitSectorsNIParams` in the Miner Actor), then call to the Sealer Actor. If the ACL is enabled, then call the ACL contract.

Reviewer 3: Is the plan to ship an FRC for this hook/interface as well..?
